Transform A re-introduction to JS page (#18303)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/javascript/language_overview/index.md

---
title: JavaScript language overview
slug: Web/JavaScript/Language_Overview
tags:
  - Guide
  - Intermediate
  - JavaScript
---

{{jsSidebar}}

> JavaScript is a multi-paradigm, dynamic language with types and operators, standard built-in objects, and methods. Its syntax is based on the Java and C languages — many structures from those languages apply to JavaScript as well. JavaScript supports object-oriented programming with object prototypes, and also supports functional programming — because they are objects, functions may be stored in variables and passed around like any other object.

Reviewer: - This second sentence feels too long. 
- "and also supports functional programming — because they are objects, functions may be stored in variables and passed around like any other object." Do those ideas go together?

Author: > Do those ideas go together?

Yes, at the core of functional programming is the idea that functions are first-class citizens. e.g. a Haskell mapping function:

```hs
animals = ["dog", "cat", "hen"]
giveBaby name = "baby " ++ name
babies = map giveBaby animals

add a b = a + b
add3 = add 3
sum = add3 5  -- sum = 8
```

In JavaScript, this is powered by the fact that functions are _objects_. In C++ you have to use function pointers which is somewhat unwieldy. In Java you use ad-hoc classes which is even more celebration.

Reviewer: Thanks! IN that case, maybe:
```suggestion
JavaScript is a multi-paradigm, dynamic language with types and operators, standard built-in objects, and methods. Its syntax is based on the Java and C languages — many structures from those languages apply to JavaScript as well. JavaScript supports object-oriented programming with object prototypes. It also also supports functional programming — because they are objects, functions may be stored in variables and passed around like any other object.
```

This page serves as a quick overview of various JavaScript language features, written for readers with background in other languages, such as C or Java.

## Data types

Let's start off by looking at the building blocks of any language: the types. JavaScript programs manipulate values, and those values all belong to a type. JavaScript offers seven _primitive types_:

> - [Number](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#number_type)

Reviewer: Perhaps summary line for each of these. Detail does follow below so just a suggestions:

```suggestion
- [Number](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#number_type): Used for all number values except for _very_ big integers.
```

- [BigInt](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#bigint_type)
- [String](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#string_type)
- [Boolean](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#boolean_type)
- [Symbol](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#symbol_type)
- [Undefined](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#undefined_type)
- [Null](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#null_type)

> Everything else is known as an [Object](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#objects). Functions are just a special type of object in JavaScript that can be called. Common object types include:
> 
> - {{jsxref("Function")}}

Reviewer: "Functions are just a special type of object in JavaScript that can be called." just feels like it is floating. I'd either put that in its own line after the set of common object types OR, IFF you were to label the items:

```suggestion
Everything else is known as an [Object](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#objects). Common object types include:

- {{jsxref("Function")}} - A special type of object in JavaScript that can be called.
```

- {{jsxref("Array")}}
- {{jsxref("Date")}}
- {{jsxref("RegExp")}}
- {{jsxref("Error")}}

> ### Numbers

Reviewer: FWIW this section is such a good summary.

- {{jsxref("Global_Objects/parseInt", "parseInt()")}}, which parses the string for an integer.
- {{jsxref("Global_Objects/parseFloat", "parseFloat()")}}, which parses the string for a floating-point number.
- The [`Number()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/Number) function, which parses a string as if it's a number literal, which supports much more variety of number representations.

You can also use the [unary plus `+`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Unary_plus) as a shorthand for `Number()`.

By IEEE 754 specification, Number values also include {{jsxref("NaN")}} (short for "Not a Number") and {{jsxref("Infinity")}}. Many "invalid math" operations will return `NaN` — for example, if attempting to parse a non-numeric string, or using [`Math.log()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/log) on a negative value. Division by zero produces `Infinity` (positive or negative).

`NaN` is contagious: if you provide it as an operand to any mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`. `NaN`, per IEEE 754 specification, is the only value in JavaScript that's not equal to itself.

### Strings

> Strings in JavaScript are sequences of [Unicode characters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Grammar_and_types#unicode). This should be welcome news to anyone who has had to deal with internationalization. More accurately, they are sequences of UTF-16 code units; each code unit is represented by a 16-bit number. Each Unicode character is represented by either 1 or 2 code units. Strings can be written with either single or double quotes — JavaScript does not have the distinction between characters and strings. If you want to represent a single character, you just use a string consisting of that single character.

Reviewer: The sentence:

> More accurately, they are sequences of UTF-16 code units; each code unit is represented by a 16-bit number. Each Unicode character is represented by either 1 or 2 code units. 

This seems like too much detail. If you want to say this, can you same something like "UTF-16 encoding" ?

```js
console.log("Hello, world");
```

To find the length of a string (in code units), access its [`length`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/length) property.

Strings have [utility methods](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#instance_methods) to manipulate the string and access information about the string. Because all primitives are immutable by design, these methods would return new strings.

The `+` operator is overloaded for strings: when one of the operands is a string, it performs string concatenation instead of number addition. A special [template literal](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) syntax allows you to write strings with embedded expressions more succinctly.

```js

> const age = 25;
> console.log("I am " + age + " years old.");
> console.log(`I am ${age} years old.`);

Reviewer: Just a suggestion:

```suggestion
const age = 25;
console.log("I am " + age + " years old."); // String concatenation 
console.log(`I am ${age} years old.`);  // Formatting with template literals
```

```

### Other types

JavaScript distinguishes between [`null`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/null), which is a value that indicates a deliberate non-value (and is only accessible through the `null` keyword), and {{jsxref("undefined")}}, which is a value of type `undefined` that indicates absence of value. There are many ways to obtain `undefined`:

- A [`return`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/return) statement (`return;`) with no value implicitly returns `undefined`.
- Accessing a nonexistent [object](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object) property (`obj.iDontExist`) returns `undefined`.
- A variable declaration without initialization (`let x;`) will implicitly initialize the variable to `undefined`.

> JavaScript has a Boolean type, with possible values `true` and `false` — both of which are keywords. Any value can be converted to a boolean according to the following rules:

Reviewer: > JavaScript has a Boolean type

`Boolean` here could be the name of the type in which case perhaps mark it up as one, or you could be using it as an adjective, in which case it should not be capitalised. I think you mean:

```suggestion
JavaScript has a `Boolean` type, with possible values `true` and `false` — both of which are keywords. Any value can be converted to a boolean according to the following rules:
```

Author: I think we have a tradition of not using code typography for these types. This is consistent with the spec language, since the type actually does not correspond to JS constructs (`typeof true` is `"boolean"`, not `"Boolean"`; `true instanceof Boolean` is false)

Reviewer: If it's a noun then capitalization is correct. IMO you should not be writing in the spec language unless it is helpful; here it seems to me that it is not.

Author: Ah, I didn't realize we were using bolds on Number and BigInt. For consistency I would remove the bold.

Reviewer: You know I'd do the opposite. I've always found this approach in the specs makes them harder to read than necessary, and there is not much value in taking a rubbish convention into MDN (in my not at all humble opinion).

That said, I would argue against "doing it right (my way :-) ) if this is a widely used convention within JavaScript on MDN.

If you're sure the docs do this everywhere then sure. If not, then perhaps we could wait on the opinion of someone like Will Bamberg.

Author: I'm also okay with using lowercase `boolean`, because that's how TypeScript denotes boolean types ^^

Reviewer: OK. Let's see what the other reviewers have to say, if anything, about this. I'm off to other work until Friday but if this is still active will do another review.

Author: "Number" refers to the type; "number" refers to a concrete object. "Function X accepts a number" versus "Function X accepts a value of type Number".

Reviewer: Resolving "leave as is".

1. `false`, `0`, empty strings (`""`), `NaN`, `null`, and `undefined` all become `false`.
2. All other values become `true`.

You can perform this conversion explicitly using the [`Boolean()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Boolean/Boolean) function:

```js
Boolean(""); // false
Boolean(234); // true
```

> However, this is rarely necessary, as JavaScript will silently perform this conversion when it expects a boolean, such as in an `if` statement (see below). For this reason, we sometimes speak of "true values" and "false values", meaning values that become `true` and `false`, respectively, when converted to booleans. Alternatively, such values can be called "truthy" and "falsy", respectively.

Reviewer: you could link to glossary definitions for truthy/falsy if you wanted. I like cross linking, but it isn't in any way necessary here.

Boolean operations such as `&&` (logical _and_), `||` (logical _or_), and `!` (logical _not_) are supported; see below.

> The Symbol type is often used to create unique identifiers. Every symbol created with the [`Symbol()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol) function is guaranteed to be unique. In addition, there are registered symbols, which are shared constants, and well-known symbols, which are utilized by the language as "protocols" for certain operations. You can read more about them in the [symbol reference](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol).

Reviewer: `Symbol` ?

## Variables

New variables in JavaScript are declared using one of three keywords: [`let`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let), [`const`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/const), or [`var`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/var).

**`let`** allows you to declare block-level variables. The declared variable is available from the _block_ it is enclosed in.

```js
let a;
let name = "Simon";

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here

for (let myLetVariable = 0; myLetVariable < 5; myLetVariable++) {
  // myLetVariable is only visible in here
}

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here
```

**`const`** allows you to declare variables whose values are never intended to change. The variable is available from the _block_ it is declared in.

```js
const Pi = 3.14; // variable Pi is set
Pi = 1; // will throw an error because you cannot change a constant variable.
```

`const` declarations only prevent _re-assignments_ — they don't prevent _mutations_ of the variable's value, if it's an object.

```js
const obj = {};
obj.a = 1; // no error

> console.log(obj); // { a: 1 }

Reviewer: Perhaps show the failing case. 

```suggestion
console.log(obj); // { a: 1 }
const obj = { b : 2 };  // syntax error
```

```

`var` declarations can have surprising behaviors (for example, they are not block-scoped but function-scoped), and they are discouraged in modern JavaScript code.

> If you declare a variable without assigning any value to it, its value is `undefined`. You can't declare a `const` variable without an initializer, because you can't change it later anyway.

Reviewer: > If you declare a variable without assigning any value to it, its value is `undefined`.

Do we need to say anything about TDZ here? I don't _think_ so - or at least you can't do so without making this overly complex.

Author: FWIW, the concept that "you can't access variables before declaration" is quite in-baked in other languages. I would just add one interesting interaction.

> JavaScript is _dynamically typed_. Types (as described in [the previous section](#data_types)) are only associated with values, but not with variables. For `let`-declared variables, you can always change its type through re-assignment.

Reviewer: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/reassign

```suggestion
JavaScript is _dynamically typed_. Types (as described in [the previous section](#data_types)) are only associated with values, but not with variables. For `let`-declared variables, you can always change its type through reassignment.
```

```js
123 == "123"; // true
1 == true; // true

123 === "123"; // false
1 === true; // false
```

The double-equals and triple-equals also have their inequality counterparts: `!=` and `!==`.

JavaScript also has [bitwise operators](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#bitwise_shift_operators) and [logical operators](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#binary_logical_operators). Notably, logical operators don't work with boolean values only — they work by the values "truthiness".

```js
const a = 0 && "Hello"; // "Hello" because 0 is "falsy"
const b = "Hello" || "world"; // "Hello" because both "Hello" and "world" are "truthy"
```

The `&&` and `||` operators use short-circuit logic, which means whether they will execute their second operand is dependent on the first. This is useful for checking for null objects before accessing their attributes:

```js
const name = o && o.getName();
```

Or for caching values (when falsy values are invalid):

```js
const name = cachedName || (cachedName = getName());
```

> For a comprehensive list of operators, see the [guide page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_Operators) or [reference section](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators).

Reviewer: Perhaps also link to the operator precedence page?

## Control structures

> JavaScript has a similar set of control structures to other languages in the C family. Conditional statements are supported by `if` and `else`; you can chain them together if you like:

Reviewer: Maybe append  "(there is no `elif` or similar combined statement)". Just because I search for that from time to time when I switch to other languages

```js
// dot notation
obj.name = "Simon";
const name = obj.name;

// bracket notation
obj["name"] = "Simon";
const name = obj["name"];

// can use a variable to define a key
const userName = prompt("what is your key?");
obj[userName] = prompt("what is its value?");
```

Objects are always references, so unless something is explicitly copying the object, mutations to an object would be visible to the outside.

```js
const obj = {};
function doSomething(o) {
  o.x = 1;
}
doSomething(obj);
console.log(obj.x); // 1
```

This also means two separately created objects will never be equal (`!==`), because they are different references. If you hold two references of the same object, mutating one would be observable through the other.

```js
const me = {};
const stillMe = {};
me.x = 1;
console.log(stillMe.x); // 1
```

Attribute access can be chained together:

```js
obj.details.color; // orange
obj["details"]["size"]; // 12
```

> For more on objects and prototypes see the [`Object` reference page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object). For more information on the object initializer syntax, see its [reference page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer). This page has omitted all details about object prototypes and inheritance; for more information, see [Inheritance and the prototype chain](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more on objects and prototypes see the [`Object` reference page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object). For more information on the object initializer syntax, see its [reference page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Object_initializer).

This page has omitted all details about object prototypes and inheritance; for more information, see [Inheritance and the prototype chain](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain).
```

## Arrays

Arrays in JavaScript are actually a special type of object. They work very much like regular objects (numerical properties can naturally be accessed only using `[]` syntax) but they have one magic property called `length`. This is always one more than the highest index in the array.

Arrays are usually created with array literals:

```js
const a = ["dog", "cat", "hen"];
a.length; // 3
```

JavaScript arrays are still objects — you can assign any properties to it, including arbitrary number indices. The only "magic" is that `length` will be automatically updated when you set a particular index.

```js
const a = ["dog", "cat", "hen"];
a[100] = "fox";
console.log(a.length); // 101
console.log(a); // ['dog', 'cat', 'hen', empty × 97, 'fox']
```

> This state is called a [_sparse array_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Indexed_collections#sparse_arrays) because there are uninhabited slots in the middle, and will cause the engine to deoptimize it from an array to a hashtable. Make sure your array is densely populated!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final array above is called a [_sparse array_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Indexed_collections#sparse_arrays) because there are uninhabited slots in the middle, and will cause the engine to deoptimize it from an array to a hashtable. Make sure your array is densely populated!
```

> Out-of-bounds indexing doesn't throw. If you query a non-existent array index, you'll get a value of `undefined` in return:

Reviewer: This is the first mention of `throw`. A brief section on exception handling would be good and a forward link from here.

Author: Good point! I almost forgot about that.

  // Do something with currentValue
}
```

Arrays come with a plethora of [array methods](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array). Many of them would iterate the array — for example, [`map()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map) would apply a callback to every array element, and return a new array:

```js
const babies = ["dog", "cat", "hen"].map((name) => `baby ${name}`);
// babies = ['baby dog', 'baby cat', 'baby hen']
```

## Functions

Along with objects, functions are the core component in understanding JavaScript. The most basic function declaration looks like this:

```js
function add(x, y) {
  const total = x + y;
  return total;
}
```

This demonstrates a basic function. A JavaScript function can take 0 or more named parameters. The function body can contain as many statements as you like and can declare its own variables which are local to that function. The [`return`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/return) statement can be used to return a value at any time, terminating the function. If no return statement is used (or an empty return with no value), JavaScript returns `undefined`.

> Functions can be called with more or fewer parameters than it specifies. You can call a function without passing the parameters it expects, in which case they will be set to `undefined`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions can be called with more or fewer parameters than it specifies. If you call a function without passing the parameters it expects, they will be set to `undefined`.
```

```js
add(); // NaN
// Equivalent to add(undefined, undefined)
```

> You can also pass in more arguments than the function is expecting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also pass in more arguments than the function is expecting, in which case the additional arguments are ignored:
```

```js
function avg(...args) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (const item of args) {
    sum += item;
  }
  return sum / args.length;
}

avg(2, 3, 4, 5); // 3.5
```

In the above code, the variable `args` holds all the values that were passed into the function.

It is important to note that wherever the rest parameter operator is placed in a function declaration it will store all arguments _after_ its declaration, but not before. i.e. `function avg(firstValue, ...args)` will store the first value passed into the function in the `firstValue` variable and the remaining arguments in `args`.

If a function accepts a list of arguments and you already hold an array, you can use the [spread operator](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_syntax) in the function call to _spread_ the array as a list of elements. For instance: `avg(...numbers)`.

> We mentioned JavaScript doesn't have named parameters. It's possible, though, to implement that using [object destructuring](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment). Objects can be conveniently packed and unpacked.

Reviewer: > "We mentioned JavaScript doesn't have named parameters." 

One of the first lines in this section was:

> A JavaScript function can take 0 or more named parameters."

Author: > A JavaScript function can take 0 or more named parameters.

That's not accurate—I'll change it to "positional parameters". "Named parameters" are like what you have in Python: `a = area(width=3, height=2)`

  return width * height;
}

// The { } braces here create a new object
console.log(area({ width: 2, height: 3 }));
```

There's also the [_default parameter_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Default_parameters) syntax, which allows omitted parameters (or those passed as `undefined`) to have a default value.

```js
function avg(firstValue, secondValue, thirdValue = 0) {
  return (firstValue + secondValue + thirdValue) / 3;
}

avg(1, 2); // 1.5, instead of NaN
```

### Anonymous functions

JavaScript lets you create anonymous functions — that is, functions without names. In practice, anonymous functions are typically used as arguments to other functions or are made callable by immediately assigning them to a variable that can be used to invoke the function:

```js
// Note that there's no function name before the parentheses
const avg = function (...args) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (const item of args) {
    sum += item;
  }
  return sum / args.length;
};
```

That makes the anonymous function invocable by calling `avg()` with some arguments — that is, it's semantically equivalent to declaring the function using the `function avg()` named-function form.

> There's another way to define anonymous functions — with [arrow function expression](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's another way to define anonymous functions — with an [arrow function expression](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions).
```

```js
function countChars(elm) {
  if (elm.nodeType === 3) {
    // TEXT_NODE
    return elm.nodeValue.length;
  }
  let count = 0;
  for (let i = 0, child; (child = elm.childNodes[i]); i++) {
    count += countChars(child);
  }
  return count;
}
```

Function expressions can be named as well, which allows them to be recursive.

```js
const charsInBody = (function counter(elm) {
  if (elm.nodeType === 3) {
    // TEXT_NODE
    return elm.nodeValue.length;
  }
  let count = 0;
  for (let i = 0, child; (child = elm.childNodes[i]); i++) {
    count += counter(child);
  }
  return count;
})(document.body);
```

The name provided to a function expression as above is only available to the function's own scope. This allows more optimizations to be done by the engine and results in more readable code. The name also shows up in the debugger and some stack traces, which can save you time when debugging.

Note that JavaScript functions are themselves objects — like everything else in JavaScript — and you can add or change properties on them just like we've seen earlier in the Objects section.

> ### First-class functions

Reviewer: Do you mean "Functions are first class objects"

## Classes

JavaScript offers the [class](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) syntax that's very similar to languages like Java.

```js
class Person {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
  sayHello() {
    return `Hello, I'm ${this.name}!`;
  }
}

const p = new Person("John");
```

JavaScript classes are just functions that must be instantiated with the [`new`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/new) operator. Every time they are constructed, they return an object containing the methods and properties that they specified. They don't enforce any code organization — for example, you can have functions returning classes, or you can have multiple classes per file.

> ```js

Reviewer: FWIW This is where my knowledge of the syntax breaks down. 

I think this assigns the result of an arrow function to a const `withAuthentication`. The function takes an argument `cls`, which I presume is a "class", and you have just said a class is a function, and that a function is an object. You then declare a new class using this class in your function body using extends.

Anyway, I find this very daunting but it may be appropriate for a real developer (which I am not), or the only way of making your points.

Author: Yeah, here it's not really trying to tell you what's happening, just that classes can be created in a very ad-hoc fashion, unlike Java.

Reviewer: OK, This is implied by the "hey don't enforce any code organization" but perhaps you need to be more explicit for people like me. 

you might, for example, add this line at the end of the paragraph/before the code.

> The code below shows just how ad-hoc the creation of a class might be:

const withAuthentication = (cls) =>
  class extends cls {
    authenticate() {
      // …
    }
  };
```

Static properties are created by prepending `static`. Private properties are created by prepending a hash `#` (not `private`). The hash is an integral part of the property name. (Think about `#` as `_` in Python.) Unlike most other languages, there's absolutely no way to read a private property outside the class body — not even in derived classes.

For a detailed guide on various class features, you can read the [guide page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_Classes).

## Modules

> JavaScript also specifies a module system supported by most runtimes. You can use the [`import`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import) and [`export`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/export) statements to exchange data between modules (which are always files):

Reviewer: ""(which are always files)" - this is an afterthought. I would have a sentence after "most runtimes" explaining what a module is and then have the "you can use the import" sentence. I think you're saying it is a javascript file. Is that the only semantics?

Author: Not exactly—JavaScript doesn't have the concept of "file" on the language level—but before we have [module blocks](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-js-module-blocks), virtually all modules in JS are files.

Reviewer: Thanks. Update looks good to me.

`NaN` is contagious: if you provide it as an operand to any mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`. `NaN`, per IEEE 754 specification, is the only value in JavaScript that's not equal to itself.

### Strings

Strings in JavaScript are sequences of [Unicode characters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Grammar_and_types#unicode). This should be welcome news to anyone who has had to deal with internationalization. More accurately, they are [UTF-16 encoded](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#utf-16_characters_unicode_codepoints_and_grapheme_clusters). Strings can be written with either single or double quotes — JavaScript does not have the distinction between characters and strings. If you want to represent a single character, you just use a string consisting of that single character.

```js
console.log("Hello, world");

> ```

Author: Still reads a bit weird. Let's add an actual example.

You can perform this conversion explicitly using the [`Boolean()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Boolean/Boolean) function:

```js
Boolean(""); // false
Boolean(234); // true
```

However, this is rarely necessary, as JavaScript will silently perform this conversion when it expects a boolean, such as in an `if` statement (see below). For this reason, we sometimes speak of "[truthy](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Truthy)" and "[falsy](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Falsy)", meaning values that become `true` and `false`, respectively, when used in boolean contexts.

Boolean operations such as `&&` (logical _and_), `||` (logical _or_), and `!` (logical _not_) are supported; see below.

The Symbol type is often used to create unique identifiers. Every symbol created with the [`Symbol()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol) function is guaranteed to be unique. In addition, there are registered symbols, which are shared constants, and well-known symbols, which are utilized by the language as "protocols" for certain operations. You can read more about them in the [symbol reference](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol).

## Variables

> New variables in JavaScript are declared using one of three keywords: [`let`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let), [`const`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/const), or [`var`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/var).

Author: I think it's fine either way.

```suggestion
Variables in JavaScript are declared using one of three keywords: [`let`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let), [`const`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/const), or [`var`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/var).
```

`let` allows you to declare block-level variables. The declared variable is available from the _block_ it is enclosed in.

```js
let a;
let name = "Simon";

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here

for (let myLetVariable = 0; myLetVariable < 5; myLetVariable++) {
  // myLetVariable is only visible in here
}

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here
```

`const` allows you to declare variables whose values are never intended to change. The variable is available from the _block_ it is declared in.

> ```js

Author: It's tricky. We only show this one example, without a "fixed" version. It reads to me like "this is how you define a constant; _oh by the way_, if you re-assign it, it throws". It's demonstrating two things in one code block.

> ```js

Reviewer 2: I'm not going to not approve the PR on these grounds, but I think this is a clear case where we would use `bad-example` if we're going to use it anywhere. It's an example of code that will not work, and that should be avoided.

It's not our convention that these can only appear with a "fixed" version - see for example https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/const for lots of similar examples.

>  It reads to me like "this is how you define a constant; oh by the way, if you re-assign it, it throws". It's demonstrating two things in one code block.

...then it might be better to have two blocks, e.g.

> const allows you to declare variables whose values are never intended to change. The variable is available from the block it is declared in.
> 
> ```js
> const Pi = 3.14; // variable Pi is set
> console.log(Pi); // 3.14
> ```
>
> If you try to change the value of a variable that was declared `const`, a syntax error is thrown:
>
> ```js example-bad
> const Pi = 3.14; // variable Pi is set
> Pi = 3; // will throw an error
> ```

const Pi = 3.14; // variable Pi is set
Pi = 1; // will throw an error because you cannot change a constant variable.
```

`const` declarations only prevent _reassignments_ — they don't prevent _mutations_ of the variable's value, if it's an object.

```js
const obj = {};
obj.a = 1; // no error
console.log(obj); // { a: 1 }
```

`var` declarations can have surprising behaviors (for example, they are not block-scoped but function-scoped), and they are discouraged in modern JavaScript code.

If you declare a variable without assigning any value to it, its value is `undefined`. You can't declare a `const` variable without an initializer, because you can't change it later anyway.

`let` and `const` declared variables still occupy the entire scope they are defined in, and are in a region known as the [temporal dead zone](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let#temporal_dead_zone_tdz). This has some interesting interactions with variable shadowing unseen in other languages.

> ```js

Author: Again—here we don't really have a "fixed" version. The intention is just to have a thought experiment of how other languages would handle this versus JS. It's not intentionally illustrating bad code.

(I'm aware how that makes linting harder.)

    return a + b;
  }
  return nestedFunc(); // 5
}
```

This provides a great deal of utility in writing more maintainable code. If a called function relies on one or two other functions that are not useful to any other part of your code, you can nest those utility functions inside it. This keeps the number of functions that are in the global scope down, which is always a good thing.

This is also a great counter to the lure of global variables. When writing complex code it is often tempting to use global variables to share values between multiple functions — which leads to code that is hard to maintain. Nested functions can share variables in their parent, so you can use that mechanism to couple functions together when it makes sense without polluting your global namespace — "local globals" if you like. This technique should be used with caution, but it's a useful ability to have.

## Classes

JavaScript offers the [class](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes) syntax that's very similar to languages like Java.

```js
class Person {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
  sayHello() {
    return `Hello, I'm ${this.name}!`;
  }
}

> const p = new Person("John");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const p = new Person("John");
p.sayHello();
```
?

Author: ```suggestion
const p = new Person("John");
console.log(p.sayHello());
```

```js
const withAuthentication = (cls) =>
  class extends cls {
    authenticate() {
      // …
    }
  };
```

Static properties are created by prepending `static`. Private properties are created by prepending a hash `#` (not `private`). The hash is an integral part of the property name. (Think about `#` as `_` in Python.) Unlike most other languages, there's absolutely no way to read a private property outside the class body — not even in derived classes.

For a detailed guide on various class features, you can read the [guide page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_Classes).

## Asynchronous programming

> JavaScript are single-threaded by nature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JavaScript is single-threaded by nature.
```

<!-- TODO -->

## Modules

> JavaScript also specifies a module system supported by most runtimes. A module is usually a file, identified by it's file path or URL. You can use the [`import`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import) and [`export`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/export) statements to exchange data between modules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JavaScript also specifies a module system. A module is usually a file, identified by it's file path or URL. You can use the [`import`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import) and [`export`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/export) statements to exchange data between modules:
```

...I think it's best to avoid making statements about support here, it usually doesn't age well. If we do want to, it would be better to make a general statement about it at the start, or something.

Author: "Module system" heavily hinges on the runtime's support. Basically the language only defines the syntax; any semantic is offered by the runtime. It's like saying "`setTimeout()` is supported by most runtimes"—sure, it's a general trend that runtimes want to support these features, but they don't have to. I'm not really worried about aging for this point.

```js
import { foo } from "./foo.js";

// Unexported variables are local to the module
const b = 2;

export const a = 1;
```

Unlike Haskell, Python, Java, etc., JavaScript module resolution is entirely host-defined — it's usually based on URLs or file paths, so relative file paths "just work" and are relative to the current module's path instead of some project root path.

However, JavaScript doesn't have standard library modules offered by the language — all core functionalities are powered by global variables like [`Math`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math) and [`Intl`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl) instead. This is due to the long history of JavaScript lacking a module system, and the fact that opting into the module system involves some changes to the runtime setup.

> For more information, see the [modules guide page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules).

Reviewer 2: I agree with Hamish that it ends abruptly. The obvious suggestion would be a "Further reading" heading pointing to the JS Guide.

Author: Right, I'll add a proper closing line later.

```js
console.log(0b111110111); // 503
console.log(0o767); // 503
console.log(0x1f7); // 503
console.log(5.03e2); // 503
```

The [BigInt](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/BigInt) type is an arbitrary length integer. Its behavior is similar to C's integer types (e.g. division truncates to zero), except it can grow indefinitely. BigInts are specified with a number literal and an `n` suffix.

```js
console.log(-3n / 2n); // -1n
```

The standard [arithmetic operators](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#arithmetic_operators) are supported, including addition, subtraction, remainder arithmetic, etc. BigInts and numbers cannot be mixed in arithmetic operations.

The {{jsxref("Math")}} object provides standard mathematical functions and constants.

```js
Math.sin(3.5);
const circumference = 2 * Math.PI * r;
```

There are three ways to convert a string to a number:

- {{jsxref("Global_Objects/parseInt", "parseInt()")}}, which parses the string for an integer.
- {{jsxref("Global_Objects/parseFloat", "parseFloat()")}}, which parses the string for a floating-point number.

> - The [`Number()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/Number) function, which parses a string as if it's a number literal, which supports much more variety of number representations.

Reviewer: This sentence is awkwarrd

```suggestion
- The [`Number()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/Number) function, which parses a string as if it's a number literal, supports many different number representations.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- The [`Number()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/Number) function, which parses a string as if it's a number literal and supports many different number representations.
```

You can also use the [unary plus `+`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Unary_plus) as a shorthand for `Number()`.

> By IEEE 754 specification, Number values also include {{jsxref("NaN")}} (short for "Not a Number") and {{jsxref("Infinity")}}. Many "invalid math" operations will return `NaN` — for example, if attempting to parse a non-numeric string, or using [`Math.log()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/log) on a negative value. Division by zero produces `Infinity` (positive or negative).

Reviewer: FWIW I don't think listing spec is helpful here.
```suggestion
Number values also include {{jsxref("NaN")}} (short for "Not a Number") and {{jsxref("Infinity")}}. Many "invalid math" operations will return `NaN` — for example, if attempting to parse a non-numeric string, or using [`Math.log()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/log) on a negative value. Division by zero produces `Infinity` (positive or negative).
```

> `NaN` is contagious: if you provide it as an operand to any mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`. `NaN`, per IEEE 754 specification, is the only value in JavaScript that's not equal to itself.

Reviewer: Again, listing the spec here very much optional. It makes these sentences flow less well too.
```suggestion
`NaN` is contagious: if you provide it as an operand to any mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`. `NaN` is the only value in JavaScript that's not equal to itself.
```

Author: I will keep the mention of "IEEE 754". Many people believe it's a quirk of JavaScript, while in fact JS is only trying to be 754-compliant. Same for the "NaN" and "Infinity" point above—the reason they exist, and the reason why certain operations generate them, is entirely defined by IEEE 754.

Reviewer: The reader of this document does not care about "why" - it's an overview. If you must mention the spec, make it an afterthought:

```suggestion
`NaN` is contagious: if you provide it as an operand to any mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`. `NaN` is the only value in JavaScript that's not equal to itself (IEEE 754 specification).
```

### Strings

Strings in JavaScript are sequences of [Unicode characters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Grammar_and_types#unicode). This should be welcome news to anyone who has had to deal with internationalization. More accurately, they are [UTF-16 encoded](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#utf-16_characters_unicode_codepoints_and_grapheme_clusters).

```js
console.log("Hello, world");
console.log("你好，世界！"); // Nearly all Unicode characters can be written literally in string literals
```

Strings can be written with either single or double quotes — JavaScript does not have the distinction between characters and strings. If you want to represent a single character, you just use a string consisting of that single character.

```js
console.log("Hello"[1] === "e"); // true
```

To find the length of a string (in [code units](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Code_unit)), access its [`length`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/length) property.

> Strings have [utility methods](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#instance_methods) to manipulate the string and access information about the string. Because all primitives are immutable by design, these methods would return new strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strings have [utility methods](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#instance_methods) to manipulate the string and access information about the string. Because all primitives are immutable by design, these methods return new strings.
```

> The `+` operator is overloaded for strings: when one of the operands is a string, it performs string concatenation instead of number addition. A special [template literal](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) syntax allows you to write strings with embedded expressions more succinctly. Unlike Python's f-strings or C#'s interpolated strings, template literals do not use single or double quotes, but use backticks.

Reviewer: Just feels a little easier to parse:
```suggestion
The `+` operator is overloaded for strings: when one of the operands is a string, it performs string concatenation instead of number addition. A special [template literal](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) syntax allows you to write strings with embedded expressions more succinctly. Unlike Python's f-strings or C#'s interpolated strings, template literals use backticks (not single or double quotes).
```

`let` allows you to declare block-level variables. The declared variable is available from the _block_ it is enclosed in.

```js
let a;
let name = "Simon";

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here

for (let myLetVariable = 0; myLetVariable < 5; myLetVariable++) {
  // myLetVariable is only visible in here
}

// myLetVariable is *not* visible out here
```

`const` allows you to declare variables whose values are never intended to change. The variable is available from the _block_ it is declared in.

```js
const Pi = 3.14; // Declare variable Pi
console.log(Pi); // 3.14
```

A variable declared with `const` cannot be reassigned.

```js example-bad
const Pi = 3.14;
Pi = 1; // will throw an error because you cannot change a constant variable.
```

`const` declarations only prevent _reassignments_ — they don't prevent _mutations_ of the variable's value, if it's an object.

```js
const obj = {};
obj.a = 1; // no error
console.log(obj); // { a: 1 }
```

> `var` declarations can have surprising behaviors (for example, they are not block-scoped but function-scoped), and they are discouraged in modern JavaScript code.

Reviewer: "but function-scoped)" - or "global scoped"?

Author: ```suggestion
`var` declarations can have surprising behaviors (for example, they are not block-scoped), and they are discouraged in modern JavaScript code.
```

If you declare a variable without assigning any value to it, its value is `undefined`. You can't declare a `const` variable without an initializer, because you can't change it later anyway.

> `let` and `const` declared variables still occupy the entire scope they are defined in, and are in a region known as the [temporal dead zone](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let#temporal_dead_zone_tdz) before the actual line of declaration. This has some interesting interactions with variable shadowing, which is unseen in other languages.

Reviewer: The sentence feels a little unwieldy. Might just be me.

"which are unseen in other languages."

"which don't occur ...

Author: ```suggestion
`let` and `const` declared variables still occupy the entire scope they are defined in, and are in a region known as the [temporal dead zone](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let#temporal_dead_zone_tdz) before the actual line of declaration. This has some interesting interactions with variable shadowing, which don't occur in other languages.
```

```js
const withAuthentication = (cls) =>
  class extends cls {
    authenticate() {
      // …
    }
  };

class Admin extends withAuthentication(Person) {
  // …
}
```

Static properties are created by prepending `static`. Private properties are created by prepending a hash `#` (not `private`). The hash is an integral part of the property name. (Think about `#` as `_` in Python.) Unlike most other languages, there's absolutely no way to read a private property outside the class body — not even in derived classes.

For a detailed guide on various class features, you can read the [guide page](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_Classes).

## Asynchronous programming

> JavaScript is single-threaded by nature. There's no [_paralleling_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing); only [_concurrency_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrent_computing). Asynchronous programming is powered by an [event loop](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop), which allows a set of tasks to be queued and polled for completion.

Reviewer: Not sure why the styling necessary in a link. Up to you.

```suggestion
JavaScript is single-threaded by nature. There's no [paralleling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing); only [concurrency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrent_computing). Asynchronous programming is powered by an [event loop](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop), which allows a set of tasks to be queued and polled for completion.
```
